6.824 2013 Lecture 8: SUNDR

Secure Untrusted Data Repository (SUNDR)
Li, Krohn, Mazieres, and Shasha
OSDI 2004

today
  all other lectures assume participants are benign and bug-free
  just for today, considering protection against malice
  a tiny window into a huge topic
  also: all about order, like much of 6.824

sundr intro
  suppose you wanted cloud-based storage
    [diagram]
    buy storage service from Acme Storage Company
  Acme might not be trustworthy
    does their software have bugs?
    do they apply all the latest O/S security patches?
    is their machine room locked?
    are their employees corrupt?
  can we still get any security properties?
    surprising result: you can!

what properties would we like for our cloud data?
  private
  authentic <-- SUNDR focuses on this
  available

use example -- data authenticity
  bunch of programmers cooperating on O/S development
  they store their source "in the cloud"
  user A adds password protection to login.c
  user B adds remote login to net.c
  user C creates a release tar file
  the release better not have just net.c change!

here's a simple design
  service stores chunks of data, like Lab 2 key/value
  clients sign values
  each user has a public/private key pair
  users know each others' public keys
  include my signature in values that I put()
    put(k, v+sign(rtm_priv, k+v))
    + means append (there are some details to get right)
  to read:
    v+sig = get(k)
    check verify(rtm_pub, k+v, sig)
    why is it good for the signature to cover k?
  anyone who knows my public key can check the server's results
  Q: what bad things can the server do?
    it cannot make up content
    it can ignore a put or get
    it can return an old signed value
    it can forget my data
    it can let someone else replace my data
  Q: is this a good file system?
    directories?
    permissions -- let a group of people write a file?
    and it does not do well on our login.c/net.c example

central sundr idea:
  server stores a log of signed FS operations
  the clients interpret the log
  (a bit like Lab 3B)

the paper's straw man
  slow, but general and correct
  [explain log scheme]
  [w login.c / uA / sig, w net.c / uB, r login.c / uC, r net.c / uC]
  client asks server for a copy of the current log
    run all ops in log to see current FS content
    appends new operation, which includes signature over whole log
    writes new log back to server
  server must implement a lock

Q: can the server entirely forge an operation?
   how do we know what the set of legit users is?

Q: could client *just* check signature on the very last log entry?
   after all, that signature covers the whole log

Q: if attacker knows a client's private key, can't it write any file?
   i.e. has the attacker won?

Q: why does a client check if its own last operation is still in the log?
   (page 3, top right)
   which ops is client then sure about?
   which ops is client then *not* sure about?

Q: what necessary to check the last entry of each user?

Q: why sufficient -- why don't we have to check signature on *all* log entries?
  
summary of what a client must validate when it fetches the log
  its own latest operation is there (so must remember on disk...)
  latest op of each user is correctly signed

Q: can the server omit the very last operation?
  yes! if it is not mine
  the server can omit any suffix of the log after my last op
  i.e. it can conceal other users' recent operations

what will happen if the server conceals the most recent operations?
  U2 signed: ... O6 O7
  U1 asks for log, server sends: ... O6 (omits O7)
  U1 signs ... O6 O8, sends to server
  can the server ever show O8 to U2?
  now U2 signs: ... O6 O7 O9
  can the server ever show O9 to U1?
  so: from now on the server can only show U1 its own new operations
    and can only show U2 its new operations
  this is a forking attack

fork consistency:
  only attack is a fork attack: conceal operations
  all users see the same log before the first concealed op
  if server conceals UX's op from UY,
    can never show either any more of the other's ops

Q: why is fork consistency good enough?
  after all, the server *can* perform a forking attack!
  it's good that it's a violent attack
    after a while it will be obvious that we've been attacked
    easy to detect if users compare notes
  much better than allowing a concealed op, but showing subsequent ops

why must fetches be in the log? (see examples on page 3)
  (this is today's paper question)
  what attack would be possible if fetches weren't logged?
  U1: O1 O2      
  U2:       fetch O3
  server could conceal O2 from U2's fetch,
    then reveal O2 only when U2 performed O3
  this is *not* fork consistency -- server can show ops after concealing one
  logging the fetches turns this into an detectable forking attack
    if server told U1 that O2 came after O1,
    server can only hide O2 from U2 by forking

does the straw man do well on our login.c/net.c example?
  can the server show new net.c and old login.c?
  that depends...

why is the straw man not enough?
  need to xfer the whole log to check signatures
  and you need to play/interpret the log entries
  caching optimizations possible, but expensive if you are away for a weekend

***

can we get rid of log, just keep current directory tree?
  each i-node/directory block contains crypto hashes of children?
  i construct new tree reflecting my operation,
    maybe sharing structure with old tree,
    and sign the new root block?

why is a signed directory tree not quite right?
  how can U1 prevent U2 from writing U1's files/directories?
    /u owned by root, /u/rtm owned by rtm
    but rtm needs to modify /u in order to modify an rtm file!
  how can i check that server didn't drop one of my operations?
    i.e. return a stale root hash to someone?
    can't e.g. check my last op is in log and was signed by others
    i.e. how can we ensure fork consistency?

first, a user should sign only its own files/directories
  each user owns a set of files/dirs
  each user has its own i-number space: rtm/23
  each user updates its own i-number -> content mapping
  per-user i-handle
  i-handle points to current i-table
  i-table maps i-number to hash of i-node
  directory block maps name to user#/i-number
    thus my directories can hold your files
    i-number lets you modify those files w/o changing my directory

all this stuff is stored in the "block store"
  key/value pairs, key = hash(value)
  so block store can't lie about value for a key
  but as usual we are worried about freshness and missing operations

now the file system is the collection of users' i-handles
  we really have a sequence of new i-handles
  arrange as a time-line per user

second, use version vectors to verify that operations are uniquely ordered
  i.e. to ensure fork consistency

version structure (VS)
  client signs+sends one for each operation
  server remembers each user's current VS
  u2's VS:
    "u2"
    u2's i-handle (hash of u2's i-table)
    version vector:
      u1 7
      u2 3
      u3 6
    u2's signature over VS

how client u2 executes an operation
  get all users' VSs from server
  validate
  get i-tables &c from block server
  store new i-table, i-handle with mods
  new VS:
    new i-handle
    increment u2's version #
  put VS back to server

how do version vectors evolve in correct operation?
  U1: 1,0           2,2
  U2:      1,1  1,2     2,3

how should u2 validate a set of fetched VSs?
  u2's VS is up to date (so u2 must remember last VS on disk)
  version vectors of diff users can be totally ordered
  i.e. 2,2 < 2,3

what would version vectors look like if server hid an update?
  U1: 1,0       [2,1]
  U2:      1,1        1,2

do the version vectors give us fork consistency?
  can the server show future U1 VSs to U2?
    e.g. 3,1
    no: 3,1 and 1,2 cannot be ordered!
  can the server show future U2 VSs to U1?
    e.g. 1,3
    no: 1,3 and 2,1 cannot be ordered

why aren't we done at this point?
  the server still needs to serialize operations w/ lock
  [timeline: u1 read .. u1 commit, u2 read .. u2 commit]
  server will be idle between sending current VVs, and waiting for new one
    i.e. between UPDATE and matching COMMIT
  we cannot just allow concurrent operations:
    not orderable, would look like an attack

contrast to PBFT
  SUNDR:
    doesn't require server to be trusted
    vulnerable to fork attack
      but good chance you can detect it
  PBFT:
    not vulnerable to fork attack
    but 2f+1 of 3f+1 servers must be trustworthy
      and you can't detect if this fails
