6.824 2013 Lecture 9: Sequential Consistency

Topic: consistency
  Consistency = meaning of concurrent reads and writes
  Less obvious than it may seem!
  Choice trades off between performance and programmer-friendliness
    Huge factor in many designs
  Today's paper a case study: distributed shared memory

Many systems have storage/memory w/ concurrent readers and writers
  Multiprocessors, databases, AFS, labs
  You often want to improve in ways that risk changing behavior:
    add caching
    split over multiple servers
    replicate for fault tolerance
  How do we know if an optimization is correct?
  We need a way to think about correct execution of distributed programs
  Most of these ideas from multiprocessors and databases 20/30 years ago
   
Example (remember this code):
  [M0, M1, nebulous shared memory system]
  x and y start out = 0
  M0:
    x = 1
    if y == 0:
      print yes
  M1:
    y = 1
    if x == 0:
      print yes
  Can they both print "yes"?

Naive distributed shared memory
  [diagram]
  M0, M1, M2, LAN
  each machine has a local copy of all of memory
  read: from local memory
  write: send update msg to each other host (but don't wait)
  fast: never waits for communication

Does this naive memory work well?
  What will it do with the example?

Naive distributed memory is fast but has unexpected behavior
  Maybe it isn't "correct", or
  Maybe we should not have expected the example to work

How can we write correct distributed programs w/ shared storage?
  Memory system promises to behave according to certain rules
  We write programs assuming those rules
  Rules are a "consistency model"
  Contract between memory system and programmer

What makes a good consistency model?
  There are no "right" or "wrong" models
  A model may make it harder or easier to program
    i.e. lead to more or less intuitive results
  A model may be harder or easier to implement efficiently
  Also application dependent
    e.g. Web pages vs memory

How about "strict consistency":
  each instruction stamped with its start time (global time)
  Rule 1: LD gets value of most recent previous ST to same address
  Rule 2: each machine executes instructions one at a time, in order
  Essentially the same as on uniprocessor
  Very intuitive consistency model

Would strict consistency run the example as desired?

How do you implement strict consistency?
  Time:  1  2  3  4
  M0:    ST       ST
  M1:       LD LD
  Time between instructions << speed-of-light between machines!
  How is LD@2 even aware of ST@1?
  How does ST@4 know to pause until LD@3 has finished?
    how does ST@4 know how long to wait?
  Too hard to implement!

Does Spanner provide strict consistency?
  You might think so, since it time-stamps operations, but no.
  If C1 starts a write, then C2 starts a read,
  C2 is not guaranteed to see C1's write.
  One reason is that the Paxos leader picks
  the write timestamp, and it may choose one
  arbitrarily far in the future.

A reasonable model: sequential consistency
  Is an execution of a set of operations correct?
  There must be some order of operations such that
  1. each machine's instructions appear in-order in the order
  2. all machines see results consistent with that order
     i.e. reads see most recent write in the order

Would sequential consistency cause our example to get the intuitive result?
  M0: Wx1 Ry?
  M1: Wy1 Rx?
  The system is required to merge these into one order,
    and to maintain the order of each machine's operations.
  So there are a few possibilities:
    Wx1 Ry0 Wy1 Rx1
    Wx1 Wy1 Ry1 Rx1
    Wx1 Wy1 Rx1 Ry1
    others too, but all symmetric?
  What is forbidden?
    Wx1 Ry0 Wy1 Rx0 -- read didn't see preceding write (naive system did this)
    Ry0 Wy1 Rx0 Wx1 -- M0's instructions out of order (some CPUs do this)

Better performance than strict consistency
  System has some freedom in how it interleaves different machines' ops
  not forced to order by op start time, as in strict consistency
  system can delay a read or write while it finds current values

Performance is still not great
  For example, M0's write must be visible to M1 before M0 can execute read
    Otherwise both M0 and M1 can read 0 and print "yes"
    (Second "forbidden" example)
  Thus operations will take a while in a distributed system
    And they have to be done one by one

A simple implementation of sequential consistency
  [diagram]
  single memory server
  each machine sends r/w ops to server, in order, waiting for reply
  server picks order among waiting ops
  server executes one by one, sending replies
  
This simple implementation will be slow
  single server will get overloaded
  no local cache, so all operations wait for server

Which brings us to IVY
  IVY = Integrated  shared  Virtual  memory  at Yale
  Memory Coherence in Shared Virtual Memory Systems, Li and Hudak, PODC 1986

Why is IVY cool?
  Acts like an expensive shared-memory multiprocessor
  On a network of cheap machines
  [diagram: LAN, machines w/ RAM, MGR]
  Runs threaded code w/o modification
    e.g. matrix multiply, physical simulation, sort

IVY big picture
  [diagram: M0 w/ a few pages of mem, M1 w/ a few pages, LAN]
  Operates on pages of memory, stored in machine DRAM (no mem server)
  Each page present in each machine's virtual address space
  On each a machine, a page might be invalid, read-only, or read-write
  Uses VM hardware to intercept reads/writes

Invariant:
  A page is either:
    Read/write on one machine, invalid on all others; or
    Read/only on >= 1 machines, read/write on none
  Read fault on an invalid page:
    Demote R/W (if any) to R/O
    Copy page
    Mark local copy R/O
  Write fault on an r/o page:
    Invalidate all copies
    Mark local copy R/W
  
IVY allows multiple reader copies between writes
  For speed -- local reads are fast
  No need to force an order for reads that occur between two writes
  Let them occur concurrently -- a copy of the page at each reader

Why crucial to invalidate all copies before write?
  Once a write completes, all subsequent reads *must* see new data
  Otherwise we break our example, and don't get sequential consistency

How does IVY do on the example?
  I.e. could both M0 and M1 print "yes"?
  If M0 sees y == 0,
    M1 hasn't done it's write to y (no stale data == reads see prior writes),
    M1 hasn't read x (each machine in order),
    M1 must see x==1 (no stale data == reads see prior writes).

Message types:
  [don't list these on board, just for reference]
  RQ read query (reader to MGR)
  RF read forward (MGR to owner)
  RD read data (owner to reader)
  RC read confirm (reader to MGR)
  &c

(see ivy-code.txt on web site)

scenario 1: M0 has writeable copy, M1 wants to read
  [time diagram: M 0 1]
  0. page fault on M1, since page must have been marked invalid
  1. M1 sends RQ to MGR
  2. MGR sends RF to M0, MGR adds M1 to copy_set
  3. M0 marks page as access=read, sends RD to M1
  5. M1 marks access=read, sends RC to MGR

scenario 2: now M2 wants to write
  [time diagram: M 0 1 2]
  0. page fault on M2
  1. M2 sends WQ to MGR
  2. MGR sends IV to copy_set (i.e. M1)
  3. M1 sends IC msg to MGR
  4. MGR sends WF to M0, sets owner=M2, copy_set={}
  5. M0 sends WD to M2, access=none
  6. M2 marks r/w, sends WC to MGR

what if two machines want to write the same page at the same time?

what if one machine reads just as ownership is changing hands?

does IVY provide strict consistency?
  no: MGR might process two STs in order opposite to issue time
  no: ST may take a long time to revoke read access on other machines
      so LDs may get old data long after the ST issues

what if there were no IC message?
  (this is the new Question)
  i.e. MGR didn't wait for holders of copies to ack?

no WC?
  (this used to be The Question)
  e.g. MGR unlocked after sending WF to M0?
  MGR would send subsequent RF, WF to M2 (new owner)
  What if such a WF/RF arrived at M2 before WD?
    No problem! M2 has ptable[p].lock locked until it gets WD
  RC + info[p].lock prevents RF from being overtaken by a WF
  so it's not clear why WC is needed!
    but I am not confident in this conclusion

what if there were no RC message?
  i.e. MGR unlocked after sending RF?
  could RF be overtaken by subsequent WF?
  or by a subsequent IV?

In what situations will IVY perform well?
  1. Page read by many machines, written by none
  2. Page written by just one machine at a time, not used at all by others
  Cool that IVY moves pages around in response to changing use patterns

Will page size of e.g. 4096 bytes be good or bad?
  good if spatial locality, i.e. program looks at large blocks of data
  bad if program writes just a few bytes in a page
    subsequent readers copy whole page just to get a few new bytes
  bad if false sharing
    i.e. two unrelated variables on the same page
      and at least one is frequently written
    page will bounce between different machines
      even read-only users of a non-changing variable will get invalidations
    even though those computers never use the same location

What about IVY's performance?
  after all, the point was speedup via parallelism

What's the best we could hope for in terms of performance?
  Nx faster on N machines

What might prevent us from getting Nx speedup?
  Application is inherently non-scalable
    Can't be split into parallel activities
  Application communicates too many bytes
    So network prevents more machines yielding more performance
  Too many small reads/writes to shared pages
    Even if # bytes is small, IVY makes this expensive

How well do they do?
  Figure 4: near-linear for PDE
  Figure 6: very sub-linear for sort
  Figure 7: near-linear for matrix multiply

Why did sort do poorly?
  Here's my guess
  N machines, data in 2*N partitions
  Phase 1: Local sort of 2*N partitions for N machines
  Phase 2: 2N-1 merge-splits; each round sends all data over network
  Phase 1 probably gets linear speedup
  Phase 2 probably does not -- limited by LAN speed
    also more machines may mean more rounds
  So for small # machines, local sort dominates, more machines helps
  For large # machines, communication dominates, more machines don't help
  Also, more machines shifts from n*log(n) local sort to n^2 bubble-ish short

How could one speed up IVY?
  paper suggests splitting up MGR
  or eliminating MGR and using broadcast to find pages
  next week: relax the consistency model
    allow multiple writers to same page!

***

Paper intro says DSM subsumes RPC -- is that true?
  When would DSM be better than RPC?
    More transparent. Easier to program.
  When would RPC be better?
    Isolation. Control over communication. Tolerate latency.
    Portability. Define your own semantics.
  Might you still want RPC in your DSM system? For efficient sleep/wakeup?

Known problems in Section 3.1 pseudo-code
  Fault handlers must wait for owner to send p before confirming to manager
  Deadlock if owner has page r/o and takes write fault
    Worrisome that no clear order ptable[p].lock vs info[p].lock
  Write server / manager must set owner=request_node
  Manager parts of fault handlers don't ask owner for the page
  Does processing of the invalidate request hold ptable[p].lock?
    probably can't -- deadlock
